so we begin this newsour with the US
president's call for an immediate
ceasefire in Gaza during a phone call
with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu Biden told his Israeli
counterpart that a ceasefire is
essential and urged him to reach a deal
without delay he also said that US
policy depends on immediate action by
Israel to protect civilians this is the
first time the two leaders have spoken
since Israeli air strikes killed seven
World Central Kitchen Aid workers in
Gaza on Monday alzer's White House
correspond Kimberly hit joins us now
Kimberly we're going to first run
through the language here what Biden is
reported to have told Netanyahu and
after that you'll tell us how new it is
and put some context around it first
what did he say
exactly yeah a very strongly worded
readout much stronger than we typically
see from the White House it was uh very
clear and by that that word specifically
the president made clear was used at
least three times uh we knew this was
going to be a tense phone call and it's
clear that the president as promised
dressed down prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu uh the president emphasized
that the strikes on humanitarian workers
and the overall humanitarian situation
was unacceptable he made clear the need
for Israel to announce a series of
specific concrete and measurable steps
to address civilian harm humanitarian
suffering and the safety of Aid workers
he made clear the need for Israel to
announce a series of specific and
concrete and measurable steps to address
civilian harm and he made clear that the
US policy with respect to Gaza will be
determined by the assessment of Israel's
immediate action on these steps in other
words despite all the steps that Israel
has taken to allow uh Aid into Gaza what
the United States feels is that the
results on the ground are unacceptable
in other words the feeling is by the
United States that 100% of the
population is in need of assistance and
the feeling of the United States is that
even as Aid workers are trying to help
and get that assistance in their lives
are in Peril Kimberly this all just
crossed so we're just learning this at
very first look it looks to me like this
is by a significant margin the strongest
language Biden has used against
Netanyahu in six months is that
fair it's the strongest language we've
seen publicly that is fair uh we've
never had uh a window into some of these
private conversations uh we know that
there has been a lot of frustration on
the part of the US president and we have
heard leaks that the president has had
some very uh Frank discussions if you
will we knew this was going to be a
colorful conversation and while we
didn't get any of that color in the
readout this is one of the strongest
most strongly worded readout that we
have ever seen from the White House in
terms of how this has been communicated
in the message to the Israeli Prime
Minister okay that is that's an
interesting distinction because you're
telling us there's been strong language
in private but this time they are
deliberately making it public Kimberly
hit reporting from the White House thank
you very much we will talk to you again
let's go to hamda salut in occupied East
Jerusalem hamda what are you hearing on
the Israeli side about this
call well we do know that US President
Joe Biden is expressing that it's
unacceptable to the United States and it
comes on the heels of a lot of pressure
that the Americans and the rest of the
International Community has been putting
on the Israelis when it comes to the
number of millions that have been killed
inside of Gaza the strikes on the aid
workers that a lot of the world have
simply said is unacceptable and
additionally that the amount of
humanitarian Aid going in is simply not
enough but the Israeli Prime Minister
speaking at a security cabinet meeting
did say that Israel is quote going to
defend itself against Iran in the
readout with the White House memo with
the call with the US president it did
end by saying that Joe Biden did Express
that the Americans would support the
Israelis with that but when it comes to
these strikes on the workers we are
hearing from the Israelis that there is
going to be an investigation into the
matter they were not so quick really to
say that it was them who attacked and
targeted these seven Aid workers
initially we heard from the Army in the
morning who called it an incident and
then we heard hours later from the
Israeli Prime Minister who said it was
unintentional the Army says that their
investigation will be wrapping up soon
but it's not really known what that
timeline looks like but they did say the
public the findings would be public
hamda the US has criticized Israel and
more specifically the Israeli Prime
Minister Mr Netanyahu
um in the in the past right but this is
this criticism is a lot stronger at
least the criticism that they're making
public is a lot stronger this time
around how has Netanyahu responded to
Biden's criticism in the past
look there's been a lot of back and
forth between American and Israeli
officials specifically the president and
the Israeli Prime Minister there's been
a lot of back and forth not just about
this issue particularly but also about
Israel's ground Invasion into Rafa
there's been a lot of disagreements with
how Israel has been conducting itself
throughout this war and remember there
was supposed to be some sort of Israeli
delegation that was heading to
Washington in the last week to go brief
American counterparts but that didn't
happen so the Americans are growing
increasingly frustrated with Israeli
policy and that hasn't necessarily been
a secret in fact according to reports
within Israeli media there was a
teleconference video type of meeting
with American and Israeli officials to
kind of brief them on the raah operation
and reports indicated that it did not go
well and there was a lot of Anger from
both parties so the Americans have been
frustrated with how Israel has been
carrying itself how it's been
Prosecuting this war specifically in
Gaza but the policies of the Americans
as we've seen have not yet changed and
Netanyahu himself has said that he's
going to do whatever he sees Fit until
there's an absolute victory over Hamas
with or without American Support okay
that's really interesting thanks for
that reminder there Hamas salh reporting
from occupied East Jerusalem